In this lecture, you'll learn about the syntax of our access control list commands and the meanings
of the different options. So, we go to global config to create an access list. Here,
we have said access-list 100
So as you learned in the last lecture, you know that this is going to be an extended ACL.
Then if we use the context-sensitive help, so I put in a question mark after that to see what my options are.
I can deny or I can permit.
I also get an option to put a remark in here as well.
It's a good idea to include remarks in your ACL.
This is because in production environments, the ACLs can get to be really long.
And if somebody else comes in and looks at the ACL after you, it's not going to be obvious why all
the different lines are there for. For example, let's say that currently you've got an extranet connection
to a business partner.
So you put a line in your ACL to permit that traffic. Well maybe two years down the line, they're not a
business partner anymore.
And if another administrator is looking at the ACL, they're not going to know what that line was there
for.
And they're not going to remove it because it would maybe do some damage.
If you'd put on the remark in there explaining what the access control entry line is for, they would
know it's not required anymore and that they can safely remove it. After that,
the next thing we have is the protocol. The different protocols that you can put in here,
it's not just TCP and UDP. Also routing protocols are included as well, like EIGRP and OSPF. They relate
to IP but they are not actually a TCP or a UDP protocol themselves. They've their own protocol.
So if you want to control your EIGRP or OSPF traffic, if it is going to be allowed to come in and go out,
then you can specify that in your ACL.
Other options included in here are ICMP for your ping traffic.
Also some of our VPN protocols as well, like ESP.
You'll learn about VPN or virtual private networks in our later lecture.
When you're specifying the protocol, use TCP or UDP, if you want that access control entry to apply to traffic
for a particular application between a source and a destination.
So the example here, which is access-list 100 deny tcp 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255 10.10.50.0 0.0.0.255 eq 80
access-list 100 deny tcp 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255 10.10.50.0 0.0.0.255 eq 80. So this would be HTTP traffic between those two
networks that we're going to deny.
So when it's a particular application, specify TCP or UDP and then you'll have the port number at the
end so you can say what the application is.
One of the options for our protocols was also IP.
So we've got TCP, we've got UDP, and there's also IP.
Use IP if you want the ACE to apply to all traffic between a source and destination address.
So not a particular TCP or UDP application, but all IP traffic between these two parts of your network.
As an example, there would be
access-list 100 deny ip 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255 10.10.50.0 0.0.0.255
So if I go back a slide, you see the first example where we use TCP.
It was traffic between those through networks which was HTTP web traffic.
The second example is all traffic.
We don't care about the application, so we use IP there.
The next keyword in our access list
command is the source.
So you can specify a source address in the format of dot decimal notation, or you can say any to specify
any source host or host to say a single source host. So this,
those wildcards,
save you typing out the entire wildcard mask every time.
And there's a couple of examples down below that mean the same thing.
So first off, if we wanted to specify an individual host, we could say
access-list 100 permit tcp 10.10.10.10 0.0.0.0. It's a wildcard mask
so that equals a subnet mask of 255.255.255.255, meaning we're matching on every single octet
here,
we're looking for a particular host.
But rather than having I type out 0.0.0.0,
we could just say
access-list 100 permit tcp host 10.10.10.10
So it's easier when you use the wildcard. There's also a wildcard for any.
So rather than saying
access-list 100 permit tcp 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255,
So that wildcard mask says we don't care about any of the octets, we'll match anything.
An easier way is to say is access-list 100 permit tcp any, meaning any IP address.
Next up, we have the source port number.
So in here, you can say eq to say match an exact individual source port number, or you can say
less than a particular number, greater than a particular number.
You can also specify a range in here as well.
You can also say neq, meaning it's not this particular port number.
Specifying the source port number is optional and it defaults to any port. And very often when traffic
is coming from a host, it is going to use an ephemeral port, which is just a random high number port
number.
It's the destination port that we're more likely to be interested in.
For example, part 80 for HTTP.
Next up, after specifying the source details, we specify the destination details, beginning with the
IP address and this is in the same format as the source address.
Then finally, we have the final options.
So in here, we can also specify the port number so we can say eq. For example, eq 80
for HTTP traffic.
We can also say greater than a particular port number or match everything above that.
We can also say less than.
There's also additional options we can enter in here, such as TCP flags, such as the urgent flags,
and if we want to do logging or not.
When we specify the destination port, the command line has got well-known port numbers built in, where
you can use a name. For example, you could say eq 80 or you could say eq www, or you could
say eq 23, or you could say eq telnet because 23 is the port for telnet.
Both of those will work just fine.
So you can say eq 80 or eq www. They're both valid and they'll both work.
So here is an example of a complete access control entry. I said
access-list 100 deny tcp host 10.10.10.10 10.10.20.0 0.0.0.255 eq www log
So on those final options, you can specify more than one. Here,
we specified the destination port and we said log as well. To verify your ACLs, after you've put the whole
config in, the command is
show access-list
If you say show access-list, that will show all of your different ACLs and it is common on production
routers that there will be multiple ACLs there because there is going to be different rules for which traffic you
want to allow or deny on one interface than it is on a different interface.
So in that case, you would have a different ACL for the two different interfaces.
So quite often we want to specify the particular access-list that we want to look at so we don't get too
much output.
So here we have said show access-list 100 and it tells me it's Extended
IP access list 100.
The lines in there are  Tand octane.
permit tcp host 10.10.30.10 host 10.10.20.1 eq telnet
So it shows you all of the lines in your ACL.
And another really useful thing in the output here is it shows how many matches that you got.
This is really useful in troubleshooting.
So if you've got an ACL applied to an interface and traffic that should be going through that interface
is not being allowed and you're not sure if it's the ACL that's blocking it or there's maybe some other kind
of connectivity issue,
If you do this,
Come on.
It will tell you because it tells you if you're getting matches or not. So, if the traffic isn't
working,
you just show access-list and you keep trying to send the traffic through and you can see the counter here incrementing
then yes,
it is being blocked because of the ACL.
If a number is not going up then it must be something else
that's causing the issue.
Notice here that we did not specify the log keyword on there. So the log keyword is not required to log
those hit counts that you see in the end there.
The log keyword is used to log to the console or to an external monitoring server.
OK, so that was it about how to configure our ACLs and how to verify them.
But we've still got some more information about ACLs to learn, so I'll see you for that in the next
lecture.